docs/videos.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: Videos
---

<center><h1>ॐ </h1></center>
---

Parama Pujya Swami Sri Nityananda Giri's Youtube channel [@swaminityanandagiri7136](https://www.youtube.com/@swaminityanandagiri7136) features very valuable, informative and excellent videos on a variety kriya yoga topics and discourses. These videos are most valuable to a kriyavan. This page will be updated with links to videos based on topics.

## Who am I ?

Swamijee gave a talk to the students and teachers of Surendranath College, West Bengal on 11th July 2021 on the topic "Who am I?" through their Value Education program. In this discourse Swamijee answers the fundamental question arising in the human mind - "Who am I?". 

* [Who am I?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_TsgJKBT3No){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}

## What is Kriya Yoga

Swamijee explains in detail in a two part video series - What is Kriya Yoga ?

* [क्रियायोग क्या है ? भाग - 1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H4s4RVYZvEE){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}
* [क्रियायोग क्या है ? भाग - 2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x3g9NaKdu_8){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}

## Discourse to Kriyavans on the day of initiation

To kriyavans on the day of initiation Swamijee explains about Dhyana, Dharana, Sukha, Duhkha, Pleasure and sufferings, Cause of sufferings, How to get rid of sufferings.

* [क्रियायोग दीक्षा प्रारम्भ सम्भाषण, ऋषिकेश - 08 नभेम्बर 2022, स्वामी नित्यानंद गिरि](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nqi0sZVx8Gk){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}

## Chitta and Vritti - The constituents of the mind (mind-stuff)

Swamijee answers Kriyavan's question on "What is Chitta Vritti?". Swamijee explains - Before understanding about Vritti it is required to understand What is Chitta. The question is answered in a two part video series.

In this first video Swamijee explains What is Chitta and further explains its constituents and types of Chitta for understanding of the practitioners of Kriyayoga meditation.

* [चित्त क्या है, चित्त का प्रकार](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nGoUf8y9U8Y){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}

In this video Swamijee explains what is Vritti and types of Vrittis.

* [चित्त वृत्ति, वृत्तियों का प्रकार](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8QZ4VLWEggY){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}

## Kriya Yoga Techniques

The videos about the various Kriya techniques shown below can be found here.

* [Kriya Yoga Techniques](../videos-kriya-yoga/). 
  * [Nābhi Kriya](videos-kriya-yoga/#nābhi-kriya)
  * [Guru Pranaam](/videos-kriya-yoga/#guru-pranaam)
  * [Khechari Mudra](/videos-kriya-yoga/#khechari-mudra)
  * [Hamsah Sādhana](/videos-kriya-yoga/#hamsah-sādhana)
  * [Vyāna Vikshana](/videos-kriya-yoga/#vyāna-vikshana)
  * [Mahamudra](/videos-kriya-yoga/#mahamudra)
  * [Kriya Proper I](/videos-kriya-yoga/#kriya-proper-i)
  * [Kriya Meditation](/videos-kriya-yoga/#kriya-1-meditation)
  * [Jyotimudra](/videos-kriya-yoga/#jyotimudra)
  * [Shambhavi Mudra](/videos-kriya-yoga/#shambhavi-mudra)

### Kriya Proper I

Kriya Proper 1 or the main/core kriya technique has been described in detail and Swamijee has answered several questions posed by kriyavans and sadhaks via various videos both in English and Hindi. Those videos are available here on the main page [Kriya Proper I](/videos-kriya-proper-1/). Individual links to specific topics are listed here for convinience.

* Kriya Proper 1 Introduction [link](/videos-kriya-proper-1/#kriya-proper-1---introduction)
* Kriya Proper 1 Breathing Techniques (Further Explanation) [link](/videos-kriya-proper-1/#kriya-proper-1-further-explained)
* Kriya Proper 1 Sounds Further Explained [link](/videos-kriya-proper-1/#kriya-proper-1-sounds-further-explained)
* Kriya Proper 1 How far should the breath be pulled [link](/videos-kriya-proper-1/#kriya-proper-1-how-far-should-the-breath-be-pulled)
* Kriya Proper 1 Is it right to pull the breath in reverse direction [link](/videos-kriya-proper-1/#kriya-proper-1-is-it-right-to-pull-the-breath-in-reverse-direction)
* Kriya Proper 1 Some questions [link](/videos-kriya-proper-1/#kriya-proper-1-some-questions)
  * Maximum permissible kriya pranayama that one can do.
  * Impact if sādhak does it more than 144 breaths
  * Number of times a sādhak can practice kriya in one day
  * Any other guidance

Commit message:

Add video - representation of devatas in the chakras

docs/videos.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: Videos
---

<center><h1>ॐ </h1></center>
---

Parama Pujya Swami Sri Nityananda Giri's Youtube channel [@swaminityanandagiri7136](https://www.youtube.com/@swaminityanandagiri7136) features very valuable, informative and excellent videos on a variety kriya yoga topics and discourses. These videos are most valuable to a kriyavan. This page will be updated with links to videos based on topics.

## Who am I ?

Swamijee gave a talk to the students and teachers of Surendranath College, West Bengal on 11th July 2021 on the topic "Who am I?" through their Value Education program. In this discourse Swamijee answers the fundamental question arising in the human mind - "Who am I?". 

* [Who am I?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_TsgJKBT3No){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}

## What is Kriya Yoga

Swamijee explains in detail in a two part video series - What is Kriya Yoga ?

* [क्रियायोग क्या है ? भाग - 1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H4s4RVYZvEE){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}
* [क्रियायोग क्या है ? भाग - 2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x3g9NaKdu_8){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}

## Discourse to Kriyavans on the day of initiation

To kriyavans on the day of initiation Swamijee explains about Dhyana, Dharana, Sukha, Duhkha, Pleasure and sufferings, Cause of sufferings, How to get rid of sufferings.

* [क्रियायोग दीक्षा प्रारम्भ सम्भाषण, ऋषिकेश - 08 नभेम्बर 2022, स्वामी नित्यानंद गिरि](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nqi0sZVx8Gk){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}

## Chitta and Vritti - The constituents of the mind (mind-stuff)

Swamijee answers Kriyavan's question on "What is Chitta Vritti?". Swamijee explains - Before understanding about Vritti it is required to understand What is Chitta. The question is answered in a two part video series.

In this first video Swamijee explains What is Chitta and further explains its constituents and types of Chitta for understanding of the practitioners of Kriyayoga meditation.

* [चित्त क्या है, चित्त का प्रकार](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nGoUf8y9U8Y){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}

In this video Swamijee explains what is Vritti and types of Vrittis.

* [चित्त वृत्ति, वृत्तियों का प्रकार](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8QZ4VLWEggY){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}

## Representation of devatas in the chakras

Swamijee explains in Kriya Yoga tradition, in the Guru Pranaam technique a Kriyavan bows down to a Devata placed at each chakra. There have been differences across traditions in this matter. But fundamentally their message is the same.

|| जाथ ब्रह्मण्डे तथा पिण्डे ||
|| जाथा पिण्डे तथा ब्रह्मन्दे ||

This means our body is a microcosm and is a representation of the macrocosm. Which essentially means all devatas are in our body. Swamijee explains in detail the significance of these devatas, what these devatas are, the constitution of the body.

* [चक्रों में देवताओं के स्थान](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vf78ehAMWQY){:target="_blank" rel="noopener"}


## Kriya Yoga Techniques

The videos about the various Kriya techniques shown below can be found here.

* [Kriya Yoga Techniques](../videos-kriya-yoga/). 
  * [Nābhi Kriya](videos-kriya-yoga/#nābhi-kriya)
  * [Guru Pranaam](/videos-kriya-yoga/#guru-pranaam)
  * [Khechari Mudra](/videos-kriya-yoga/#khechari-mudra)
  * [Hamsah Sādhana](/videos-kriya-yoga/#hamsah-sādhana)
  * [Vyāna Vikshana](/videos-kriya-yoga/#vyāna-vikshana)
  * [Mahamudra](/videos-kriya-yoga/#mahamudra)
  * [Kriya Proper I](/videos-kriya-yoga/#kriya-proper-i)
  * [Kriya Meditation](/videos-kriya-yoga/#kriya-1-meditation)
  * [Jyotimudra](/videos-kriya-yoga/#jyotimudra)
  * [Shambhavi Mudra](/videos-kriya-yoga/#shambhavi-mudra)

### Kriya Proper I

Kriya Proper 1 or the main/core kriya technique has been described in detail and Swamijee has answered several questions posed by kriyavans and sadhaks via various videos both in English and Hindi. Those videos are available here on the main page [Kriya Proper I](/videos-kriya-proper-1/). Individual links to specific topics are listed here for convinience.

* Kriya Proper 1 Introduction [link](/videos-kriya-proper-1/#kriya-proper-1---introduction)
* Kriya Proper 1 Breathing Techniques (Further Explanation) [link](/videos-kriya-proper-1/#kriya-proper-1-further-explained)
* Kriya Proper 1 Sounds Further Explained [link](/videos-kriya-proper-1/#kriya-proper-1-sounds-further-explained)
* Kriya Proper 1 How far should the breath be pulled [link](/videos-kriya-proper-1/#kriya-proper-1-how-far-should-the-breath-be-pulled)
* Kriya Proper 1 Is it right to pull the breath in reverse direction [link](/videos-kriya-proper-1/#kriya-proper-1-is-it-right-to-pull-the-breath-in-reverse-direction)
* Kriya Proper 1 Some questions [link](/videos-kriya-proper-1/#kriya-proper-1-some-questions)
  * Maximum permissible kriya pranayama that one can do.
  * Impact if sādhak does it more than 144 breaths
  * Number of times a sādhak can practice kriya in one day
  * Any other guidance
